The push and pull of globalization and localization have shaped Vietnam and with it, THP. No company develops in a vacuum from the history of the country it operates in. [JS1] And in the late 1970s when my father and mother were first starting to make their way in the world, that history was manifesting itself in two competing forces, which acted as yin and yang to each other.

Aspiring businessmen and women faced extreme challenges, but also unique opportunities. These fed each other and drove both my parents to strive ever harder to create a successful business for themselves and their family. This chapter explains how.

As of 2018, THP is Vietnam’s largest family-owned beverage manufacturer in the Fast Moving Consumer Goods category (FMCG), employing more than 5,000 staff nationwide. We have a 15 to 20 percent domestic market share, ranking alongside multinationals such as Coca-Cola and Japan’s Suntory. In terms of the healthy beverages sub-sector, THP leads the pack with a 50 percent market share.

Given where THP stands today, it is hard to imagine how difficult it must have been for my parents, Trần Quí Thanh and Phạm Thị Nụ, in the beginning. This is particularly the case for Vietnam’s younger generation. They have grown up in a much richer and forward-looking country, which has embraced the market economy and is literally buzzing thanks to their dynamic attitude.

I come from the middle generation, sandwiched between them and my parents. In many ways, I think that makes me the lucky one. I was fortunate that I did not experience the horrors of the war, or its immediate aftermath, firsthand. But I did grow up during a time of scarcity, and because of that, I understand just how much hard work it takes to achieve success in life. I take nothing for granted, just like my parents.

I was thirteen years old when my father converted the Ben Thanh Brewery Beverage Factory into (Tân Hiệp Phát), later re-named the THP group. I grew up in the shadow of that transition. My family initially lived in the factory, and today we have an apartment on the top floor.

The company is an inseparable part of our family’s DNA, and the second generation remains as committed to it today as the first generation was in the 1990s when my parents started building it up. They worked round the clock then. We all still do now.

And it was not long before I began my own journey to support them, followed by my younger sister Bích. During those formative years, I met thousands of THP workers and learned something of value from many of them. Nothing beats learning on the job, and I owe a lot of my ideas to that firsthand experience working on the factory floor. 

My sister and I also owe a lot to our parents. Their story is an inspiration to us, and I would like to share a little of it because it is impossible to understand how THP became the company it is without getting to know them.

People often say great companies are the ones that understand their market and customers, but the truly great companies nearly always have an inspirational leader who creates and embodies the brand. Yet that does not mean the brand cannot survive when the leader is gone.

Apple is a perfect example of a company that has continued to bestride the tech world since Steve Jobs’ death with its new CEO Tim Cook at the helm. Apple is still the world’s most valuable company, but the company is what it is today because of Steve Jobs: his vision, his talent, and his steely determination.

My father and mother embody all three of these characteristics. In some ways they are yin and yang to each other. My father is an extremely logical person. A trained engineer, he can be fierce in his desire for perfection, although he is also a very good listener and teacher. He is a visionary, full of ideas and always eager to experiment. But at the same time, he also desires structure and control.

My mother is equally intelligent and a great salesperson. She is the soft power behind the company and has incredible people skills. She has always respected my father’s business ideas, his leadership, and his appetite for risk and change.

She is someone who feels happiest when she can help others, and she is the one who always looks out for the company’s employees. When she became sick in the last few years, they demonstrated their devotion to her by literally queuing up by her hospital bed.

My parents share many traits in common. There is no limit to their ambition, and they are relentless in pursuing their dreams. My father literally never gives up. Everything that they believe is encapsulated in THP’s seven core values. The core value closest to my father’s heart is the one, which states that, “Nothing is impossible. There are no limits to what we can accomplish.”

Like all great entrepreneurs, my father is not afraid of failure. In fact, I would say he actively embraces it, because he knows it will teach him valuable lessons, which will enable him to achieve even greater heights in the future. His drive does not come from a desire to be rich. Neither of my parents is motivated by money or leads a lavish lifestyle. They frequently carry no cash around with them.

If something catastrophic happened to THP, it would be the loss of the company they would mourn not the riches that have come with it. Both started with nothing and would not be unnerved to return to that state. They are the kind of people who would simply pick themselves up and start again.

When they got married in 1979, they had to do this, quite literally. Before they went on honeymoon, my father had been living with his father. When they came back it was to a house that was empty except for two bowls and a two pairs of chopsticks.

While they were away, my father’s cousin had persuaded my grandfather to move in with him and bring all his possessions along, too. My grandfather had bought the boy up after his father died, but the cuckoo in the nest used my parents’ wedding as an opportune time to make his move. Over the next five years, he completely drained my grandfather’s retirement fund.

My father felt betrayed and angry by his father’s departure, but one of his great talents is the ability to let go. Events like this have just made him stronger. By contrast, so many people end up suffering mid-life crises because they want to make positive changes in their lives but fear losing all the material wealth they have accumulated if they trip up along the way.

My parents just move on. And this particular story had a happy ending when my grandfather eventually came back to live with them again. He grew to love my mother so much that he ended up regarding her as his daughter and not just his daughter-in-law. She is Catholic, and shortly before he died, he called in a priest to convert to her religion. It was a big deal for his large Buddhist family, but he did it out of respect for her. 

Embracing change can be terrifying, but my parents believe there is nothing to fear. They have incorporated this belief into another one of THP’s core values: “Today is better than yesterday but not as good as tomorrow. Progress is never-ending; each day being a little better than the one before.”

Life is difficult

My father is an entrepreneur and a successful tycoon. But was he born with the traits that made that way—or did his childhood give them to him? Was it nature or nurture? It is an age-old debate, but one thing for sure is that his upbringing sharpened those traits.

The man who spent childhood nights facing down two giant hogs, which were eyeing him up for their dinner, was never going to be fazed by a company like Coca-Cola. And the pigs in question were not like the cute little porcine in the movie Babe. They were 200-kilogram monsters, fattened up on milk powder donated by Americans hoping to feed the children my father was temporarily living with at an orphanage during the war years in the mid-1960s. His nights in the pigpen were a punishment for fighting, even though he had been standing up for another boy.

But it cut no ice with the nuns who ran the orphanage, situated in the mountains near Dalat. Despite the cool temperature, they dumped him in a pen wearing just a pair of shorts, a sleeveless T-shirt, and a pair of slippers. The slippers did not last long, as the pigs gobbled them up before he had a chance to climb onto a small platform that divided one pen from the next.

Fortunately, a kindly pig keeper gave him some rice to eat and straw to sleep on. The nuns bred pigs to provide income for the orphanage. Unsurprisingly, pork featured heavily on the menu, if you can call it that. Breakfast, for example, was a lump of raw pork fat, the size of a man’s fist, in a bowl of hot oily milk. Eating this dreadful concoction made some of the children retch. Others would bite into the fat too hard and the insides would spew out in a jet.

If ever my father tried to scoop out the lump of fat and hide it in the corner of the room, the nuns made him get down on all fours and eat it off the dusty floor with only his mouth, just like a pig. One time, he tried to take a bird’s eye chili from the kitchen to liven it up. He was caught and made to eat a whole bowl of them.

My father’s troubles at the orphanage made him resilient and taught him to overcome obstacles and how to make the best of a bad situation. He was only ten years old when he arrived there in 1963.

He soon had to toughen up. Many of the other children had turned into thugs after being tormented by the nuns, and bullying was rife. For a large percentage of those boys were not just orphans, but the discarded half-white or half-black offspring of American GIs: abandoned, rootless, and disparaged cultural anomalies.

My father was only at the orphanage in the first place because my grandfather decided to hide him there for fear his two stepbrothers would kill him for the inheritance his mother had left her three children. She had died when he was just nine, after being struck by a coach as she dashed across a road in her haste to issue orders to workers at her trucking company.

My grandmother had considerable business acumen and had amassed a small fortune. Likewise, my grandfather was a successful businessman in the construction trade, and, together, my grandparents clearly passed on the business gene to their son.

My father showed early promise as a trader when his father made his annual visits to the orphanage. The nuns did not allow children to keep personal money, so my father pretended to hand over the small allowance his father gave him. However, he retained 20 percent for himself, secreted away in his sandal.

He also learned how to read his foe’s psychology and play that to his own advantage. For having money was no use to him unless he could spend it on his favorite banh khot (savory mini rice pancakes) at a local stall. So, he told the nuns he wanted to attend a church service four to five kilometers away. They admired his spiritual devotion; he enjoyed his physical sustenance.

His father eventually decided to bring him back to Saigon. He was there during the 1968 Tet Offensive, fifty years exactly since the publication of this book. The smell of war and death was everywhere after the North Vietnamese army launched a surprise assault on the city in the early hours of the lunar New Year celebrations. Hand to hand fighting, the sound of gunfire, tanks, and bombs. Dead bodies littered the streets. It became the norm.

Such terrible times fostered a live-today, die-tomorrow mentality. The suffering people witnessed or experienced had a big psychological impact, although young people, like my parents, were not aware of how it was affecting them at the time. Many students neglected their studies. Morals were looser. Fists were clenched tighter.

My father, however, said he managed to channel the increasingly “customary” aggression by learning martial arts such as Taekwondo and free boxing. As he progressed from belt to belt, he learned self-control. Instead of becoming a hotheaded young man, he became a coolheaded one instead.

When Saigon fell in 1975, my father was also in the city. In fact, his father’s house was overrun with South Vietnamese soldiers who had chosen that part of the city to make their final stand. Luckily, they did not provide any resistance, otherwise it is highly unlikely he would be alive today.

By this point, he had graduated as a mechanical engineer from the Technical University of Saigon. He wanted to be an entrepreneur, but private industry was illegal, and Vietnam was in a chaotic state. Private lands were being confiscated, central planning imposed, and business people were regarded as class enemies.

Many fled abroad or were sent away to developing areas for “re-education.” Some were not released from internment camps until the late 1980s.

My parents’ families did not escape unscathed. On my father’s side, his half-brothers lost all their land. Their mother’s legacy, which they had been so desperate to make sure my father did not get, was expropriated.

My mother’s family had not been rich to start with and suffered even more than my father’s because many of them lost their lives, not just their money. One of my uncles had been killed in the war. Another one decided to flee in a boat. So did his sister in another boat.

It is estimated that around one third of the Vietnamese “Boat People” died at sea trying to reach neighboring Asian countries in the two decades after the war ended. According to UNHCR figures, about 800,000 made it to refugee camps.

They were not good odds, but many felt it was their only option to forge any kind of life for themselves. A similar tragedy has been unfolding in parts of the Middle East and Africa where millions of people have been leaving their countries in search of a better life. One thing I have always admired about my father and his childhood friend Uncle Tu, who heads R&D at THP, is that they stayed and eventually prospered.

It was a different matter for my uncle and aunt. For most people, it took several attempts to save enough money to build a boat or pay for passage on one. It cost up to USD $20,000 in 2018 money. A huge amount at the time, payable in gold, the only currency that had any value.

My aunt set out with her husband and small son. Pirates overran their boat and it capsized. She was not a strong swimmer. Her husband only had the strength to hold onto her or their small son. He chose the child. The two of them survived; she did not.

My uncle left with his wife and four children. One child starved to death on the boat and had to be given up to the sea. The rest survived and were eventually re-settled in the US. But many overseas Vietnamese people suffered Post Traumatic Stress Disorder because of what they endured. It was not a well-known condition at the time, and they did not receive the counseling they needed. Two of those three surviving children committed suicide as adults.

Sadly, these kinds of stories are all too familiar to the Vietnamese. The Boat People have become a bit of a forgotten topic to Westerners, but the war itself has not. When Westerners come to Vietnam, or meet Vietnamese people abroad, the war nearly always features somewhere in the conversation. Go to a bookstore and the shelves with books about Vietnam will be all about the war.

But it is not something the Vietnamese talk about among themselves. My parents and grandparents rarely mentioned it as I was growing up. Their attitude echoes how Western soldiers felt after World Wars I and II. After witnessing terrible events, the desire for normality is often very strong.

Creativity flourishes in the face of deprivation

In the mid-to-late1970s, my father was embarking on his working life, and his thoughts were focused on the future, not the past. He got a job at the Ministry of Industry, Engineering, Industrial Equipment, and Farming.

But he found it difficult to support himself on a government salary and in 1977 quietly started a small yeast business. But he was not quiet enough. My grandfather became extremely worried about what would become of my father now that private business was outlawed, so he decided to take matters into his own hands.

He told the police my father was running an illegal business. He also reported him to the electricity board claiming he was using more than his allotted electricity quota.

My father was marched off to the police station and would have ended up in jail if it were not for my mother. She had appeared on the scene by then and used her legendary negotiating skills to resolve the situation and bring him home again.

In his later years, my grandfather’s concern switched from the possibility of prosecution to my father going bankrupt. He decided to intervene again, secretly giving my maternal grandfather a stash of gold to hand over to my father in the event his business failed.

But he was also not quite secret enough. Within a month, my father had found out and persuaded my maternal grandfather to invest the money in the business instead. His own father never discovered what happened. [JS2] 

Unfortunately, my grandfather continued to remain at loggerheads with my father about his business activities until he, my grandfather, died in 1991.

My father’s time at the police station also failed to deter his business ambitions. But for years afterwards, it did mean he had to keeping showing the electricity board he was not using more than his quota. So, he continued working crazy hours in a tiny little room, desperately trying to stay ahead of rampant inflation.

Many others were in the same boat, all trying to scrounge parts, because they could not import any thanks to US sanctions. My father quickly learned two lessons, which have served him well in life. Firstly, he understood that his biggest challenge was how to scale up and improve efficiency and in turn build market share.

Secondly, he realized that to do this he would need to be innovative, as he simply could not buy the machinery he needed. He especially wanted centrifuge filters, which would allow him to produce larger batches of product at a cheaper cost.

Fortunately, my father’s innate passion for all things mechanical quickly led him to the most innovative of solutions. The answer lay in the now disused US Army hammocks, which had been abandoned by the military when they hurriedly left at the end of the war. Much of the material found its way into Saigon’s markets, and on close inspection, my father noticed it was made of high-grade nylon.

He recalled how American soldiers often used their hammocks to protect their weapons and keep them dry when they were crossing rivers. To the bewilderment of onlookers, my father tested his idea by taking a sip of water and forcing it through the fabric, using just the pressure from his mouth. 

This became his secret centrifuge-filter process. The results were so promising that he rushed back to the market and bought all the remaining hammocks. He bought them for two reasons: to ensure he had a sustainable nylon supply and to make sure his competitors could not copy him. Gaining a competitive advantage is crucial, but it is often temporary. After a lot of tinkering, he used the nylon to more than double his yields.

There was another reason why his competitive advantage was unlikely to last. The Vietnamese economy was rocked by waves of price instability and inflation. Economic conditions were terrible throughout the early- to-mid 1980s.

The government got into the practice of adopting a new currency every few years. Inflation was running around 300 percent, and the banks could not be trusted. Even if a business doubled or trebled its sales, it still lost money due to inflation.

In 1979, yeast prices also collapsed, forcing my father to pivot his business to a sugar- and fructose-processing operation instead. And this is how my mother’s experience came into play; her first job had been selling sugar at a local wet market in Saigon.

One of the key issues in marketing is how to brand a product that is essentially no different from any other. Sugar is a commodity, and my mother was faced with numerous other stalls selling it at the same price as her.

Her solution was to apply the personal touch. She always remembered her customers’ names. No sound is sweeter to most people.

She also made a note of how much sugar they bought and asked them whether they were satisfied with her service. From the surprised looks on their faces, she gathered she was alone in trying to forge a personal connection.

Later, she upgraded this into a proto customer-loyalty program. If they were loyal customers, she would give them a little extra sugar or a free sample of something else. Soon she was selling out her entire inventory every day.

It was my mother’s idea to move from yeast to sugar after my parents got together. She was also the one who found the broken-down machinery my father was able to repair. Neither of them knew anything about sugar processing, but like all great entrepreneurs they viewed this as a challenge they could take apart and solve.

During the 1980s, the government also started turning a blind eye to private enterprise. My parents forged a partnership with a government company, which guaranteed a consistent supply of raw materials in return for a cut of the profits.

They also made sure they paid upfront, so the company knew they would not just run away with the stock. In turn, my parents have always said that they were fortunate to live and work in both the communist and capitalist system, because they have learned from both.

After a few years in the sugar business, they moved into alcohol distilling and then into beer. By now, it was 1994 and the winds of reform were sweeping through Vietnam, legitimizing private businesses, and creating multiple opportunities.

My parents timing was perfect. Fast forward three years and THP had grown into a fast-growing business, distilling rum and manufacturing beer.

My father then spotted an opportunity to buy a disused production line owned by Saigon Alcohol Beer and Beverages Corp (Sabeco), one of Vietnam’s largest state-owned companies. But it was not an easy acquisition. Sabeco did not want to help incubate a rival, so its managers broke up the production line and sold parts from different warehouses. My father made sure he was at every auction.

When Sabeco got wind of what he was doing, they tried to foil him by selling crucial components to scrapyards. My father and his men scoured every single one until they had what they needed. They even purchased bits of scrap metal they did not need for fear the scrapyard owners would bump the price up if they realized how desperate my father was for certain items.

Once THP had all the pieces, my father and his team had to work out how to put them back together again. He hired some Sabeco employees to help him; and after months of working round the clock, they got the production line up and running. They even managed to reduce the loss rate from 37 percent to about 2 or 3 percent. My father said he achieved it by never giving up. He also said Sabeco ended up respecting what he did.

That production line had the capacity to produce one billion liters of beer per year. My father dreamed of scaling it up to 300 billion liters. THP soon became the third-largest beer manufacturer by mass segmentation.

That line is still in operation today and has the largest capacity of any beverage manufacturer in Vietnam, although it no longer produces beer. The man overseeing it has also been with my father since the beginning. We call him Little Thanh, as he and my father share the same name. But the reality is that he has grown considerably in stature from working just one machine to running them all.

My family moved out of beer production in the first decade of the twenty-first century after my father calculated how much higher margins were on the soft drinks and teas THP had begun producing as well. Over the next decade, THP grew rapidly.

Between 2006 and 2009, the company grew by 400 percent. We launched a raft of new products, which I will explain in more detail in chapter 4, as they still form the bedrock of our output. Today, herbal tea is THP’s best-selling product, with sports and energy drinks, soy milk, green tea, and bottled water not far behind. 

Mutually beneficial partnerships

Since the turn of the century, THP has become one of Vietnam’s leading private-sector companies. It has successfully ridden the wave of rising domestic consumption at home and taken its first steps to export abroad.

This fast growth should continue, given that disposable incomes are still on a very sharp upwards curve. GDP per capita has nearly doubled since 2009 and stood at USD $2,200 in 2017. In the biggest cities it is above USD $5,000, the level where economic growth really starts to accelerate fast.

As I have already mentioned, the Western multinationals—Coca Cola, PepsiCo, Procter & Gamble, Nestlé—have all come marching into Vietnam to capitalize on one of Asia’s fastest-growing and largest markets.

This book has extolled the virtues of local businesses. But economies benefit from having companies of all different sizes and from the interactions between them. So, the multinationals have been welcomed and done much to boost the economy. [JS3] 

THP is open to working with any company that can help promote our vision. And win-win does not mean a company has to be nice or compromise. It means it needs to be clear about its strategic direction and find partners than can enhance or execute that. No company can operate alone forever. Partnering is a critical strategic skill. For example, we appreciate that THP’s success has always been determined by its partnerships with suppliers and distributors and contractors.

But the key is to create a solid platform at home first. This gives local companies the springboard to venture overseas. But local companies should never be afraid to step up onto the international stage. They should have the confidence to realize that no matter how small the country they come from is, they will have gained valuable insights from it, which may have eluded larger international companies that operate across many[JS4]  countries.

 

One thing my father has never lacked is confidence, and back in 2000 he not only established high goals but also made it clear he intended to out-compete the multinationals. This was his vision:

The THP Beverage Group aims to make a significant contribution to the success of Vietnam by creating the country’s leading beverage brands. Our goal is to become one of the leading food and beverage companies in Asia while catering for global consumers.

 

Note the audacity of that statement. In 2000, THP was not even among the leading food and beverage companies in Vietnam, let alone Asia. But like President John F. Kennedy’s goal of sending a man to the moon and returning him safely to earth, my father intended to shoot for the stars, too.

THP’s goal is to increase revenues from US $500 million in 2016 to USD $1 billion in 2023 and USD $3 billion by 2027. We want to build our exports to 10 percent of the total by 2023 and hope to find a strategic partner that will help us to achieve it.

In the past, our suitors have largely been Western multinationals. And there is no reason why they might not be in the future. But one of the biggest trends in the world today is Asia’s rise and the impact this is having on global business practices.

Many Asian companies have a similar background to ours and consequently think about their business operations in a different way from Western multinationals. They are often family-owned firms that value personal relationships.

They usually want to find a partner to help them access foreign markets just as THP does. But they generally do not want to take that partner over. Asian firms like joint ventures, and they tend to invest for the longer-term.

As Asia gets wealthier and its firms build up greater financial firepower, they are starting to push Western multinationals aside as well. Europe’s demographic and internal issues have led several companies to beat a retreat and shut up shop across the region. It is Asian firms that are taking their place.

This dynamic has been very evident in Vietnam, where two of the biggest M&A deals in recent years saw a Thai firm replace a European one. In 2016, building materials group LafargeHolcim sold its Vietnamese operations to Thailand’s Siam City Cement for USD $524 million. That same year, France’s Casino Group withdrew from Vietnam’s retail sector after selling its supermarket chain, Big C, to Thailand’s Central Group for USD $1.4 billion.

And then there is China and its famous “Going Global” strategy. Its companies are everywhere across the globe, but the government only started to encourage them to venture overseas once it was confident they had first built up a solid position at home.

And it was very clever about how it helped them clamber up the value chain. Western firms were so desperate to gain access to its 1.34 billion citizens that they agreed (readily or otherwise) to set up joint ventures with local partners and transfer their intellectual property and technology to them.

China learned quickly from that technology transfer. But while it has let foreign companies in, the government has made sure to keep control of key strategic industries and put a multitude of incentives and regulations in place to foster domestic champions. It is not Amazon that controls online shopping in China, but Alibaba and JD.com. Citizens use Baidu to search online, not Google.

It also selectively blocks M&A deals. In 2009, it famously stopped Coca-Cola from buying Huiyuan Juice in what would have then been China’s largest-ever foreign buyout. Today, Huiyuan Juice is still independent and ranks as China’s largest fruit- and vegetable-juice manufacturer.

Vietnam does not quite have the same pulling power as China. It only has a population of 92.7 million, although as the fourteenth most-populous country in the world, it is not without considerable allure.[JS5] 

The government has allowed multinationals to set up in the country without having to enter a joint venture, and it is allowing them to buy state-owned companies in full as well. But it is retaining control of strategic sectors and it is doing a lot more to nurture private enterprise. By the end of the 2020s a number of these national groups will likely have created successful regional footprints.

The Việt Kiều (overseas Vietnamese) will aid that growth. This common term refers to Vietnam’s four-million-strong overseas diaspora, many of them former Boat People. The government has been actively welcoming them back, because it knows the country will benefit from their talent and overseas training. Many are overjoyed to be reconnecting with their country.

 

During the 1980s, the term vượt biên (to cross the border) became a common term in Vietnam. As those people return and memories of the war fade into the background, perhaps those phrases will come to have a new meaning as we progress into the 21st century. To cross the border will assume a positive rather than a negative connotation, symbolizing Vietnam’s growing confidence on the world stage rather than a flood of refugees.

 

Typically, my father has his own personal proverb about where he sees our company heading. “Great success comes to those who set sail for the sea,” is his refrain. “No success comes to those who stay moored in the river.”
